we'll continue our discussion of the
riemann integral so let me just recall a
few uh
bits of notation from last time and then
also the main result that we proved at
the end of last class
so
we had partitions
which are just finite sets
so here
a is less than b and we're looking at an
interval a b
partitions they're just finite sets
of a b
and then we also had tags which were um
finite sets as well
with
c1 between
x naught and x1
which is less than or equal to xc2 which
is
less than or equal to x2
and so on
and we call these
tag partitions
and we also had
the norm
of a partition
this is the max
of
so we think of partitions as being
as breaking up the interval a b up into
smaller
sub intervals
x x0 to x1
um
i got to get a different piece of chalk
this one is going psychedelic on me
and then the exceed ones are just
points
chosen uh in these smaller sub-intervals
the norm of a partition is the length of
the largest sub-interval
and then we have the riemann sum
associated to
partition
tag partition
xc
which is the sum from
j equals 1 to n
f of x c
j
x j minus xj minus 1.
okay
so this uh just
some notation from last time and then
what did we prove
prove the following theorem
which is the existence for the riemann
integral
which is
the following that
for all continuous functions on a b
there exists
a unique number
which we denote integral a b f
with the property that
with the following property that if i
take any sequence of tag partitions with
norm going to zero so this is the
partitions are getting
finer and finer
we're all sequence of tagged partitions
with norms going to zero
we have that
the associated riemann sums
this sequence converges so this is now a
sequence of real numbers
and equals this
number uh integral abf okay no matter
what sequence of tag partitions i take
with norms converging to zero
um
the riemann sums converge
to this number which we call the riemann
integral of f
that
i think the very last thing we proved
was that
the riemann integral is linear
the integral of the sum is the sum of
the integrals
and if i multiply a continuous function
by
a scalar then the scalar pulls out
okay
so
so now we're going to discuss some
properties of the riemann integral
so
the next is that
in some sense
the
area of the union if you like is the sum
of the areas if we think of the integral
as being
the area underneath the curve
so
this next property is the additivity of
the riemann integral which states the
following
if f is in c
a b
and
i take a point between c and b
then
the integral from a to b of f is equal
to the integral from a to c
of f plus the integral from c
to b
of f
okay
so
prove it again
all we know about
these numbers is that they satisfy this
property so what we'll do is
we'll take a sequence of tagged
partitions
of ac converging to this integral
in a sequence of tag partitions
uh from c to b
converging to this integral uh when i
stick them into the riemann sums
but then when i take the union of those
tag partitions i get a partition of a b
and um
and uh which will approach the integral
of a b that's the
basic
the basic
intuition and of course
what was i saying a minute ago about
the area of the union being
some of the areas well again like i said
if we think of
the riemann integral as being the area
underneath the curve then this says that
the area
from a to b underneath the curve is
equal to the area underneath the curve
from a to c plus the area underneath the
curve from c to b
okay
okay so
let's take
when we use the right notation here
let's uh
take two partitions let
be a sequence of partitions
so a sequence of tag partitions i should
say
of
ac
such that
norm of this partition
goes to zero so this is a a now a
partition
of ac
and then we'll take another sequence of
tag partitions of cb
and
for those
watching at home wondering what these
letters are it's the greek ada that's
the greek zeta
so
we have
sequence of partitions
of ac these are the y and eta and then
we also have a sequence of partitions of
c b
such that
the
norm of these guys
goes to 0 as well as r goes to infinity
okay so now if i have a partition of a c
in a partition of c b
if i take their union
then i will get a partition of a b
this will be the union of these guys
so
it's easy to see that this is now a
a sequence of tagged partitions of a b
so
and moreover so
what is the norm of uh this new tag
partition what is the maximum length of
the sub intervals well it's just going
to be the maximum of the
norms of y and z right so
and note
that
the norm of x so bar this is equal to
the maximum
of the norm of y
r
and the norm of z are and since both of
these converges to zero the maximum of
them also converges to zero
okay
so now we just put this all together
so by this theorem
what do we know we know that
the riemann sum associated to
this converges to the integral a b
of f
the riemann sum associated to
this sequence of tag partitions
converges to
now ac f
and then
this sequence of
riemann sums associated to these tag
partitions
converge to
cbf
okay
and now we just use the fact that taking
a riemann sum is uh
island is uh additive right
since
the riemann sum
associated to this partition which is
just a union of these partitions
is equal to
this implies taking the limit as r goes
to infinity the left hand side as i
wrote down here converges to
a b f
and then the right hand side the sum the
limit of the sum is the sum of the
limits so this converges to
ac f
and then the right
thing here converges to
the second thing here converges to the
integral from c to b at f
okay
and that's it so really um
the fact that the integral is additive
uh follows from
the simple fact that kind of uh riemann
sums are additive okay
and the fact that limits respect
algebraic operations the the
limit of the sum is the sum of the
limits
okay
all right so um
the riemann integral is additive this is
uh
and also linear so we see that
the riemann integral is something that
respects
kind of
um algebraic operations
with respect to the
real numbers namely adding and
scalar multiplication
and it sort of respects
i guess what you could say um
topological uh considerations or not
really topological but
um
this additive property is is a very
natural property um what am i getting at
here so now one could ask how does um
the integral
interact with inequalities so this is
something we ask about uh all limits
right
at least limits of sequences that we saw
you know if one sequence lies below
another one
taking limits respects that okay
of course that's not true for the
derivative i can have two functions one
bigger than the other and
the second derivative and the derivative
of the smaller one be bigger than the
derivative of the first one
um
but so one can ask the question let's
suppose i have two functions one smaller
than the other
what is the uh
what is the um
what's the relationship between the
integrals
okay
so
suppose
f and g
are now two continuous functions
on a b
so then the first
part of this theorem is that
if for all x
and a b
f of x is less than or equal to g of x
then
the integral from a b of f is less than
or equal to the integral from a b of g
all right and this is kind of
understandable i mean again if we think
of the integral as being a theory of the
area underneath the curve right if i
have one function sitting above another
function then the area should be
uh bigger than the area of the smaller
one
the the curve which sits below
the first one
and
now um
the riemann integral is a limit of
sums
in in some sense and a limit of certain
uh sums involving f
and
what
so
we do have this relationship uh
involving
um
sums and absolute values with the
triangle inequality which says the
absolute value of the sum is less than
or equal to the sum of the absolute
values
and if you think of the integral as
being essentially in
a limit of sums or if you like a
continuous
sum
then you should expect that the integral
the absolute value of the integral is
less than or equal to the integral of
the absolute value and that's indeed
what we have
so
second is
the absolute value of the integral from
a b of f is less than or equal to the
integral from a b
of the absolute value of f so
like this is
the triangle in
quality for integrals
okay
all right so we'll prove
one
using again the the main property we
have about uh riemann integrals
that they satisfy this um
property and then we'll deduce two
directly from number one okay
okay so
let
let's take a sequence of
tagged partitions
with norms converging to zero
then
for all r
if we take
the riemann sum approaching
with respect to f of
this tag partition this is equal to
j equals 1 to n this is just the
definition
r here is just
indexing the the sequence of tag
partitions i should say this is
doesn't have to end at some single
number um
in fact it can't
in common with all of these tag
partitions
okay
so here n of r is just the number of
partition points
um
that we have in our partition x
superscript r
and since we're assuming f of x is less
than or equal to g of x for all x and a
b this is less than or equal to
sum from j equals 1 to n of r
g of c j of r
r
okay
and what is this last thing this last
thing is just equal to the riemann sum
of g with respect to this tag partition
x and xc
so
[Applause]
we started off with the riemann sum
associated to f
and we showed that's less than or equal
to
um
just kind of summarizing here
that this riemann sum
is less than or equal to this riemann
sum
so now if i take the limit as r goes to
infinity
this on the left hand side approaches
the integral from a b
and since
limits respect inequalities
i get this
okay
which is what we wanted to prove
all right and from number two i mean
from for number two we get from number
one uh
i mean we get number two from number one
essentially quite quickly so
since
plus or minus f is less than or equal to
the absolute value of f
we get that plus or minus
so integral of plus or minus f
is less than or equal to
the integral from a b
of the absolute value now
scalar multiplication we proved last we
proved last time pulls out
so that means
plus or minus the integral of
f is less than or equal to
the integral of the absolute value of f
which is the same as
so for the minus sign this tells me
this inequality and for the plus sign
i get that inequality but that's
equivalent to saying that the absolute
value of the integral of f
is less than or equal to
the integral of the absolute value
okay
and that's the proof of the theorem let
me make a
small remark here so
and this will be a
an exercise on the homework
to prove this
is the following well
we know that taking limits respects
inequalities but not necessarily strict
inequalities right so
i can have two sequences
one strictly less than the other for all
n
and then as n goes to infinity their
limits could in fact equal each other
right so for example if i take
uh
the first sequence to be zero the second
sequence would be one over n one over n
is always bigger than zero yet they both
converge to zero so
um
you know taking limits does not respect
strict
inequality however in this setting
um
which is a
you know very nice i mean it's actually
an extremely important
um
property of the integral is that uh this
limiting process that we do to take
integrals in fact does
um it's not just any old limiting
process it actually does
uh
respect strict inequality so what am i
saying
is that we can prove uh
something a little bit stronger and
that's which i'll state in its kind of
reduced form here if i take a continuous
function
and it's positive
then
we already know that the integral of f
is going to be non-negative by what we
just proved
but in fact the integral of f is
positive okay
and again so this is also kind of
important from
you know psychological standpoint if
we're thinking of the integral as being
a theory of the area underneath the
curve
so what this states is that um
and again i'm not i'm not going to prove
this this will be on the assignment
again so so this you know
coincides with our intuition of what a
theory of the area underneath the curve
should be so this says if a continuous
function is positive so like the picture
i drew you then
the integral which we interpret again as
the area underneath the curve is
positive so that matches what our
our uh
you know desire for this to be a theory
of the area underneath the curve should
be
all right
but um
okay
and so um
you know we have
if you
like i mean we could have proved this
from
[Applause]
um
you know basic considerations in what
the definition of the integral is
but
we have the following
theorem that
for all alpha and r
i could just say the following
well
let me not uh
not state it this way
so um
okay
so
going a little off script here but it's
okay
so
we actually haven't computed a single
integral yet okay
really it's it's tough to with this
definition in a minute you know we'll
prove the fundamental theorem of
calculus and be able to do it uh very
easily but
let me first prove at least you know the
most basic
uh integral so
integral from a b of the function one
equals
b minus a
okay
so um
what's the proof
take a sequence of partitions converge
with the norms converging to zero and we
just look at the riemann sum
and for
1 this will be quite easy to compute
what
the riemann sums are
so this is a sequence of partitions with
norm
converging to zero
then
if i look at
associated riemann sums
this is equal to j equals 1 to n of r
no matter what i no matter what x c is i
just get 1 and then times the length of
the interval
the sub interval
now this is a telescoping sum
right
uh
you know meaning this is equal to
x1 minus x0 plus x2 minus x1 plus
up until xn minus xn minus 1. so all i
pick up is
not x1 but
x0 and xn so this is equal to
x j of r x n
sorry
of r
minus
x 0
of r
and this is the last point in the
partition this is the first point in the
partition
and as always for partitions the last
point is b the first point is a
so this is equal to
b minus a
and
now
this thing on the left hand side is
equal to b minus a
so this tells me
that the integral
which is equal to this limit of riemann
sums is equal to b minus a
right and then the assignment for this
i guess uh when you see this last week
was to essentially compute the integral
for the integral from a b of x dx
okay
and so we get from
uh
this theorem and this theorem um
following bound
kind of for
the area so let me draw a picture
and so that this is not so surprising
let's say i have a function from a
b
there's uh the function f
and
so that was supposed to go through this
point so let's make that a little bit
okay
i suppose i don't need these parts but
let's say i have so for a continuous
function it always achieves a minimum
and maximum and at least for this
picture the minimum occurs here the
maximum occurs here
um
now what's the comparison about uh areas
from this picture well the area
underneath the curve of f
will be bigger than or equal to the area
underneath the curve of the constant
function
equal to little m sub f and that's just
b times a times m sub f again by
you know intuition but this is also seen
from the theorem we just proved along
with the linearity of the riemann
integral which we've already proved
and the integral of f
the area underneath this curve is also
less than or equal to the area
underneath the curve where f achieves a
maximum
i
it's the 12th week of uh class and i
still haven't brought colored chalk so
hopefully that was clear enough without
me having to color stuff in
so
the theorem is the following
if f
again we're working with continuous
functions because that's all we
can integrate or are going to integrate
in this section
and i have these two numbers the
m of f x
which we know is in fact a min meaning
there exists a point in here
so in fact i'm going to write min we
know that by the min max theorem that
for every continuous function it
achieves its minimum
and
max
then as i was saying a minute ago
the area underneath the curve m little m
sub f which is this smaller square is
less than or equal to the area
underneath the curve
of
f so
so
little m sub f times b minus a the area
underneath the minimum is less than or
equal to the area underneath the curve
of
f
which is less than or equal to
the area underneath the curve
of
the
taller line capital m sub f
okay
so how do we prove this well we just
used these previous two theorems right
since
little imps of f is less than or equal
to capital m sub f
uh
so since little m sub f is less than or
equal to f of x which is less than or
equal to capital m sub f
for all x
and a b
we can apply
that theorem up there to get that the
integral
of little m sub f again this is just a
fixed number
is less than or equal to the integral of
from a b of f
okay
and now again these are just fixed
numbers so by what we proved here that
the integral from a to b of 1 is b minus
a
and the fact that scalars pull out so
this
number here can come out and this is
just m sub f times the integral from a b
of 1.
so this is little m sub f times b minus
a
and over here this is capital m sub f
times
b minus a
okay
and that's the proof
[Applause]
so now let me uh make a few comments
about uh
um
some conventions or really
so we've been talking about
at least i've been talking about you're
not here so we haven't been talking at
all
so
we've been talking about the
integral from a b to f when a is less
than b
um
but uh
i'm gonna use i'm just gonna set down
some
uh
kind of
convention or you could you could say
this is really notation
that
when i have this
when i write down this symbol integral a
to a of f
this is really just another way of
writing 0 and
[Music]
another is that if in fact b is less
than a then the integral from
a b
to f
so remember we've been talking about the
integrals from over intervals uh
um
or
where the number on the bottom is less
than the number on the top
so
whenever i write this symbol with
the bigger number on the bottom
and the smaller number on the top you
should read this as
minus the integral of
uh
with
this being you know the right in the
right place meaning this number here is
less than this number here okay
and so
um one
again these are these are really just
notations that if i write this this is a
fancy way of writing 0. when i write
this you should
this means
minus the integral with um the right
numbers on top and bottom meaning
uh the smaller numbers on the bottom the
bigger numbers on the top
okay
all right and so maybe you ask so this
is uh
so why
why do i define that to be zero well if
you if you like um
one is
consistent
with the fact that
for all
continuous functions if i take the
integral
from a to b with b bigger than a
and i take the limit as b goes to a
this equals zero
okay
and two is then consistent with number
one and then additivity
okay
with additivity and number one because
then by number one i get that the
so additivity will tell me that the
integral from a to a of f is equal to
the integral from a b to f
plus the integral from b a
f here assuming b is less than a
and so
if by one
this is zero
then
to be consistent with additivity this
would force the integral from
a b to f to b minus the integral from b
a
of f okay so
both of these um
conventions if you like
are um
consistent with
um
you know the properties of the riemann
integral namely that
the limit as b goes to a of
you know the area underneath this curve
as the base gets smaller and smaller is
zero and then from
if i assume this then
additivity tells me that the integral
from a b has to be minus the integral
from b to a of f okay
all right so now
we computed successfully one integral
and of course when you took calculus
that was not all you could do
calculus is what it is because
of
the hero of the story
which is
a fundamental theorem of calculus which
is what we'll prove now
theorem
so
fundamental theorem of
calculus which states the following
if
i have a function
big f
so
first off
let little f be a continuous function
so the first statement is
um if how to basically how to compute
integrals if capital f integral from a b
to r
is
differentiable everywhere on a b
and
f prime equals little f
then
the integral from a b of little f equals
f of b minus
f of a
right another way of stating this is
that the integral from a b of
capital f prime is equal to
f of b minus f of a
and then the second part so
the first part is about computing
integrals the second part is about
solving
uh differential equations basically
so
the function
g of x
equals
the integral from a to x
of
f
so for each x and a b
so
i stick it in
as
the upper limit on this integral
this function is
differentiable on a b
and it satisfies the simplest
differential equation
which is
g prime equals f
and
g of a equals 0.
okay
so this is a fundamental theorem of
calculus the first part being about how
do you compute integrals the second how
do you compute solutions to a
differential equation namely
how do i find the solution to the
problem g prime equals little f so
little f is the given i want to find a
function g that satisfies g prime equals
little f with initial condition capital
g of a equals 0 that's given by this
function here where i take little f and
i integrate it from a to x
okay
so that's how i interpret the
fundamental theorem of calculus the
first about
solving integrals a second about
solving differential equations
all right so this is the hero of uh
calculus
the batman of the story
and i said at one point that the mean
value theorem is
the alfred of this story
and therefore it should play a decisive
role in proving
this theorem
all right
so we're uh
going to connect these two things so in
order to even get at this guy let's we
have to take a partition a sequence of
partitions converging with norm
converging to zero so
um
and then see what we get so
this is the proof of part one
so let's take
a sequence of tag partitions i keep
forgetting to write tag and say the word
tag but
uh you should hear that even though i
don't say it
with norm
actually we're not even going to
this is correct so
i'm actually going to come up with the
tags in a minute so let's first take
a sequence of partitions so this is
actually completely correct
so
no tags yet no points chosen in between
with norm converging to 0.
and then i'm going to choose a special
tag for each r
so that
in the limit i get this equality between
the integral of f and capital f of b
minus f capital f of a
all right
so here comes alfred by
the mean value theorem so on
so we have this
sub interval
x sub j minus 1 and x sub
j so by the mean value theorem there
exists
for each j
there exists
a point in between these two guys
such
that um
if i take f of x of j
of r
minus f so capital f remember is this
function that's differentiable and whose
derivative gives me little f
this is equal to
capital f prime of x c j of r
times
x j
minus x j minus 1.
and by assumption the derivative of
capital f is equal to little f right so
i'm going to replace this
f prime with
little f
okay
so now these exc's i will take as my tag
my sequence of tags
put a star by this relation here
then
what do we
conclude
if i look at
the riemann sum for f associated to now
this sequence of
tags where now the xc's
are exactly these exceeds that satisfy
this relation
this is equal to
as before sum from j equals 1 to
n of r
f of x g
c sub j
now by
how these exceeds were chosen remember
they were chosen to satisfy
this
relation here star by the mean value
theorem so this is
equal to the sum from j equals 1 to n
sub r
f of x sub j
minus f of x sub j minus 1
right
and again this is a telescoping sum
and so all i pick up is when j equals n
sub n of r the last point and when
j equals 0 so this is equal to f of
f of the last point
minus f of the first point
now for partition this is always
b
and this is always a so this is f of b
minus f of a
so every one of these riemann sums
this
uh sequence of tag partitions gives me f
of b minus f of a so then i get take the
limit and i get the integral
and therefore
the integral from a b to f which is
limited as r goes to infinity of s of f
equals
and we just computed this is always
equal to f of b minus f of a so
okay
so
we took a sequence of just a
recap we took a sequence of partitions
with norms converging to zero
and we chose special tags okay
using the mean value theorem so by the
mean value theorem on each one of these
sub intervals
capital f evaluated at the right
endpoint minus f evaluated at the left
endpoint
is equal to f so which is the derivative
of capital f evaluated at some point in
between times the length of the interval
okay
so now if we take the riemann sum
associated to this
sequence of tag partitions where these
xc's are defined by this condition
then
we can actually compute this riemann sum
and it just gives me f of b minus f of a
no matter what
r is so then when i take the limit as r
goes to infinity
uh the left side goes to the integral
but it's always equal to capital f of b
minus f of a
all right
so that proves number one
okay
so for number two
um
what do we want to show we want to show
this function so first off it's by um
convention
g of a which is the integral from a to a
of f this is zero so i don't have to
check the second condition i just need
to check that this function is
differentiable and uh the derivative of
that function is little f
so
let's see b in
a b
so what do we want to show
we want to show
the derivative of capital g
is equal to little f so
we would like to show that the limit as
x goes to c of the integral
from
a to x of f
minus the integral from a to c of f
over x minus c which is this is just g
of x minus g of c equals
f c
okay
so we're going to do this by
uh
by the books by the book i guess
um
when i say so that's
that's kind of a bad pun i guess i don't
know but
meaning an epsilon delta
proof for this limit so
let epsilon be positive
the delta that we pick in the end
depends on
and we'll use crucially the fact that f
is continuous
at c
okay
so since
f is
continuous at c
there exists a delta 0 positive
such that
what
t minus c less than delta 0
implies that
f of t minus
f c is less than epsilon let's give
ourselves a little room over 2.
okay
choose delta to be
this delta zero remember we have to show
for every epsilon there exists a delta
so that if x minus c is less than delta
then this minus this an absolute value
is less than epsilon i'm now saying
choose delta to be this delta 0 where
this delta 0 is ensuring
this right here
okay as long as t minus e is less than
delta zero
now because of uh sign conventions um
we'll do two cases so
not really i'm just going to do
1k so
suppose that
x is between c and c plus delta so we
want to also show uh
we'll also need to be able to do the
case that x is between c minus delta and
c that would cover the whole range of
uh the absolute value of x minus c is
less than delta but bigger than zero 0
i'm just going to do this case
so now we want to show that if x is in
here then this thing minus this thing in
absolute value is less than epsilon
so
first off i would like to note that
if
t is in
this integral this interval c to x
then that tells me that
so the absolute value of t minus c which
is equal just
t minus c this is less than or equal to
x minus c
which is less than delta
and remember this equals delta zero all
right
so
as long as i'm in this interval here
the absolute value of t minus e is less
than delta zero so let me just draw a
picture so that this is pretty clear
this length is delta if i take any
t in between then this distance from t
to c is also going to be less than delta
so that's all i've written down
okay
thus
[Applause]
right now compute
the difference quotient minus the
proposed limit
so
looking at 1 over x minus c
times the integral
minus the integral from a
c of f
minus
f c this is the thing i want to show is
less than epsilon now by additivity the
integral from a to x since x is uh
well the integral from a to x of f is
equal to
the integral from a to c plus the
integral from c to x
right so this is equal to
1 over x minus c
integral from
c to x of f
minus f of c
okay now
this is just a fixed number okay
and therefore
i'm going to do a little trick
minus the integral from so
in fact let me do this let me throw in
some integration
variables so that this becomes clear
so this is um
f of t dt minus integral of f of t
dt i've been using the notation where i
just don't write down the integration
variable but let me do that here
f of t dt minus f of c
okay
now this is equal to minus
f of c over x minus c
integral from
c to x of 1
dt
right
because the integral from c to x of the
constant 1 gives me x minus c that
cancels with this guy now f of c is just
a number it's just a fixed number so i
can bring this inside the integral
and then use
the linearity of the integral to in fact
rewrite all of this as
1 over the absolute value of x minus c
integral from c to x of f of t
minus
f of c
dt an absolute value
now 1 over x minus c this is positive
because x is bigger than c so
i can pull this out just like that
and now what do i know for t
in between this uh between c and x
the absolute value of t minus c
is less than delta
zero right so by
um
what i have here
as long as i'm in this interval cx
i'm going to have this inequality
hold
[Applause]
so before i do that let me first apply
the triangle inequality for integrals
this is less than or equal to the
integral from c to x of
f of t minus f of c
okay
so by the second thing that i've
underlined
uh for t in this interval c to x this
thing here
is always less than epsilon over two
so by what we know about integrals um
respecting inequalities
this is going to be less than or equal
to 1 over integral x minus c integral c
to x
epsilon over 2
dt
and now this is just equal to so this is
a number it comes out so i get one c
integral from c to x of one so i get x
minus c
so
times the integral of one so x minus c
and that cancels
less than epsilon
okay
and you know so this was for x between c
and c plus delta the argument for c
between c and c minus delta is
essentially the same okay just with
you know minor sign changes
so similarly
c minus delta
less than c implies that the integral
from
a to x of f minus integral a to c of f
over x minus c
minus f of c
is
less than epsilon
so we've done
x between c minus delta and c x between
c and c plus delta so
which implies that
if
then
which is what we wanted to prove
okay
so um
we've
concluded the proof of the batman of the
story
um
and this gives us not only a way of
computing integrals but
useful way of um
of
if you like shifting the the burden or
shifting the blame whenever we do
compute the integrals of certain
products so what i'm talking about is
the integration by parts
which i can't remember if i said it was
first or second i think it was second
okay first most useful thing from
analysis is um the triangle inequality
the second being integration by parts
and a close third being the koshi
koshi schwartz inequality
which in conjunction with integration by
parts is quite a
most research current research papers
are based on these two things right and
using them in a very clever way
so integration by parts is
suppose f and g
are
continuously differentiable
what that means is that
the derivatives exist on a b and they're
also continuous
so if i you hear me say continuously
differentiable in the future that means
that the function has a derivative
that's continuous
then
the integral from a b
of f prime times g so the one with the
burden because remember
differentiability is kind of a miracle
so
miracles always
come with some sort of burden this is
equal to f of
b times g of b
minus f of a times g of a
minus the integral from a to b
and now we shift that burden to g times
g prime
okay
so let me put a parenthesis around that
so you can no i don't
let's do it this way g prime f
all right so i can take that derivative
and put it on g
and what's the proof the proof is just
the fundamental theorem of calculus and
the product rule
since
the derivative of f times g is equal to
f prime times g plus
g prime times f
we get by the fundamental theorem of
calculus the integral
from a b of let's say the right hand
side so this is f prime g
plus g prime f
is equal to the integral from a to b of
f
times g prime
so
by fundamental theorem
of calculus
and now the integral of the derivative
is
the function evaluated at the endpoints
so that's f of
b times g of b
minus f of a
times g of a
okay
so
that's integration by parts which is a
consequence of
you know
the product rule
the quotient rule is something it's just
really the product rule in disguise kind
of so we don't get really anything new
from there
but we also remember have the chain rule
which then results in
the change of variables formula
theorem
let v from a b
to c d
be
continuously differentiable
so
this means the function is continuous
and its derivative is also continuous
with the property
that the derivative is positive
on a b
b of a equals c
b of b equals d
it's hard to see that a
okay
so you can think of phi as being a
change of variables from c d to a b
then the integral from c to d
of
f
of u d u is equal to
the integral from a to b
f of p of x
a prime of x
dx so
maybe
instead of change of variables
so this is
change of variables aka
u-substitution
where you set u equal to phi of x then d
u is equal to v prime of x dx
okay
and again the proof of this
just follows from the fundamental
theorem of calculus and the chain rule
um
that we know so
let f be a function from a b to r
such that
f prime equals little f
uh we can always find one by the second
part of the fundamental theorem of
calculus right we can always solve that
differenti this differential equation
up to a constant
then if i look at the function
f of p of x and i take its derivative
with respect to x by the chain rule this
is equal to
f
prime of
p of x times phi
prime of x
which equals f of
v of x
p prime of x
okay
so then when i integrate that
integral from a b
or b of x
f of b of x
the prime of x
dx this is equal to
the integral from a b
of f of phi of
x
prime dx
now by part one of the fundamental
theorem of calculus this is equal to
um
the integral of the derivative is this
thing evaluated at the end point so f of
v of b
minus f of v of a
this is equal to f of
d minus f of
c because phi of b equals d
b of c
phi of a equals c
and phi of b equals d
but again by the fundamental theorem of
calculus since capital f is when you
differentiate it gives me little f
this is equal to the integral from c to
d of
f prime
of u d u which is equal to
f of u
d u
again so we just applied the fundamental
theorem of calculus really three times
okay first to find a function whose
derivative is little f
then we use the chain rule to to
conclude that the derivative of capital
f of phi equals this thing which is the
thing we're integrating on the right
hand side
so that when we integrate that that's
equal to the integral of a derivative
and therefore we just pick up the
endpoints
f of d minus f of c but because capital
f is equal to
uh
is an anti-derivative of little f
meaning its derivative is little f it's
also
this number here is also equal to this
integral here which is this guy
and
so then we get the the
change of variables formula so i think
we'll stop there and next time we'll do
a quick application of
uh
the most second most useful thing on
earth which is integration by parts
and then we'll move on to sequences of
functions
you